###INTRODUCTION
___
During this semester, we touched upon but rarely if ever really expounded upon the nature of books and book-ish materials that I found really fascinating; the mechanical and physical elements that went into printing and the book-making industry. It was in these aspects that I was able to resonate the most with, it was something that I could touch and understand at a mechanical level and not in humanities theory of book-ishness. However, it was also these aspects that always felt left as ‘window dressing’ and a backdrop to the theory and discussion around what the book means and is intellectually consumed. So, being that I have taken book-binding courses and preservation courses with the iSchool, I decided to take my technical skills and hands-on experience to the task of creating a book that would be similar to those we have been talking about in our classes.
###BOOK-BINDING PROCESS
___
To the end of completing my goal of creating a book and understanding the mechanical constraints of the book and bookbinding process, I first had to choose the style of book that I would wish to emulate. I have experience creating rudimentary coptic style bindings amongst other less technical required items, but decided to emulate the style and function of a 19th to 20th century sewn case binding made in a quarto style with a marbled paper and binding cloth cover. I chose to look at the University of Adelaide’s and Victoria and Albert Museum’s examples for the transition and types of 19th century book bindings and what I should expect (Gourlay 2016,  Hayes 2018). In studying these different types of book bindings that have survived to the modern day it made me think more about the process of saving and reminded me about the Young, Peterschmidt and Frazier “File Not Found Series” where they speak about the degradation of object and the conscious and unconscious choice of saving (2017). I decided that I would take a much more simple route, something perhaps made for a modest middle-class family, as I did not have the tools available to make a cover design that had become increasingly popular with cloth bindings.

The first thing that I noticed while actually creating the book is the amount of time that is spent making a book; be it folding, cutting, measuring, pressing, or sewing all of these factors took time and some were outside of my control. Pressing a book to form and make the shoulder permanent took days of pressing that the book could not be touched or used, which cost time. As we learned in class from discussion, from Fresh Press, or even from Benjamin Franklin’s autobiography we know that businesses such as a bindery would have many artisans that would all be working on separate elements or projects that would be moving at the same time. This would allow a commercial bindery to work on a book whilst still pressing another or finishing another and this would allow the work to never be properly stymied by the production realities of the binding process.

As I worked on the book itself I found that I was thinking more about the individuals who worked on these objects and what their lives were like. Being an artisan it is perhaps likely that they had slightly better wages than that of the unskilled laborers of the factories, but I distinctly think about the “Anatomy of an AI System” piece and how it was conjoined in our discussions about the invisible injustice of labor and of things that we take for granted (Crawford and Joler 2018). How many people and industries have to be tapped into in order to make the books that I am hand binding, who made the paper, the glue, the string, and where were these things sourced from. Am I complicit in the destruction of natural habitats and the ever growing threat of global warming? Well naturally the answer of any person living in a modern nation would be yes, but to what degree are we engaging with that system. It’s something that has become a big question for people to tackle and it certainly has to be thought about when talking about the tangled web of industry, even during the period of the 19th and 20th centuries, how did the book we see in the RBML get here, whose hands did it pass through and whose lives did it affect.

###ANALYSIS AND REFLECTION
___
Once the book was finished, I was able to reflect on the work, my craft, and how it made me feel in order to have achieved my goal of creating a book. It was not perfect, few handmade things are, but I still got reasonably close and I was able to use it for other preservation projects over the course of my semester. It was an amazing experience and I think that I was able to find myself more sympathetic to the bookbinders of the period as I had done one and could only think about how much work the actual commercial process must have been. Of course, the creation of the book is not an exercise for its own sake, it has to be applicable to the goal of the class, to offer an understanding of the history of media and how they interacted with each other and innovations over time.

In Betsy Butler’s 2010 article “‘There Ain't Anything in This World That Sells a Book Like a Pretty Cover’: Nineteenth-Century Publishers' Bookbindings in Library Collections” she writes that “publishers’ bookbindings offer insight into the aesthetic tastes of those who purchased them over a century ago” (Butler 2010, 23). And I think that is something that we can also learn through the act of making these books in these styles, we learn about the aesthetics of the period and the possible frustrations of those who made them. As a modern person with preservation in mind, I do not carry rabbit hide glue but rather use an archivally stable PVA called Jade 403 and that speaks to the way that material or methods of gathering resources may change, but technique and stylistic choice may still be used to emulate or harkon back to an earlier period; perhaps as a mode of nostalgia or as an aesthetic of perceived quality and value. That idea of emulation or harkening back to an earlier period is something that humans do all the time and it has been one of the foundational tenets of this class. This emulation can be used for both good and for ill, examples the traditions of familial holidays promoting heritage versus Mousllini’s evoking of the Roman Empire for political gain. Understanding when emulation and evocation are promoting or detracting from people’s wellbeing or worse is a key to seeing the warning signs of growing nationalism.
###CONCLUSION
___
All of these themes and ideas run in my mind when I was working and now after, thinking back about all the things that I had done and might have wanted to do differently. I think that this book making experience really got me grounded into the experience of those individuals and I think it would have been really excellent, in a different class in a similar vein to actually make books start to finish with the making of paper, printing, folding, sewing, covering, and presented a finished book as part of a book art or book print class. It certainly gave me an appreciation for bookishness and how we might apply those thoughts and ideas to new mediums moving forward.

###BIBLIOGRAPHY
___

Butler, Betsy. “‘There Ain’t Anything in This World That Sells a Book Like a Pretty Cover’: Nineteenth-Century Publishers’ Bookbindings in Library Collections.” Art Documentation: Journal of the Art Libraries Society of North America 29, no. 1 (2010): 23–30. http://www.jstor.org/stable/27949535.

Kate Crawford and Vladan Joler, “Anatomy of an AI System: The Amazon Echo As An Anatomical Map of Human Labor” (2018).

Gourlay, Catriona. 2016. "Tradition And Transformation In 19Th-Century Bookbinding • V&A Blog". V&A Blog. https://www.vam.ac.uk/blog/museum-life/tradition-and-transformation-in-19th-century-bookbinding?doing_wp_cron=1652041276.3525590896606445312500.

Hayes, Lee. 2018. "Bound To Please: The Iconic Victorian Binding In An Era Of Industrialisation And Mechanisation | Rare Books & Manuscripts". Adelaide.Edu.Au. https://www.adelaide.edu.au/library/special/exhibitions/victorian-bindings/.

Lauren J. Young, Daniel Peterschmidt, and Cat Frazier, “File Not Found Series” (2017)

Benjamin Franklin, The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin, Chapters 2-7
